---
title: "Streaming Matching and Edge Cover in Practice"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2024-05-01-Streaming-Matching-and-Edge-Cover-in-Practice
date: 2024-05-01
venue: 'In the proceedings of 2024 SEA (forthcoming)'
abstract: "Graph algorithms with polynomial space and time requirements often become infeasible for massive
graphs with billions of edges or more. State-of-the-art approaches therefore employ approximate serial,
parallel, and distributed algorithms to tackle these challenges. However, such approaches require stor-
ing the entire graph in memory and thus need access to costly computing resources such as clusters and
supercomputers. In this paper, we present practical streaming approaches for solving massive graph
problems using limited memory for two prototypical graph problems: maximum weighted matching
and minimum weighted edge cover. For matching, we conduct a thorough computational study on
two of the semi-streaming algorithms including a recent breakthrough result that achieves a 1/(2 + ε)-
approximation of the weight while using O(n log W/ε) memory (here n is the number of vertices
and W is the maximum edge weight), designed by Paz and Schwartzman [SODA, 2017]. Empirically,
we show that the semi-streaming algorithms produce matchings whose weight is close to the best
1/2-approximate offline algorithm while requiring less time and an order-of-magnitude less memory.
For minimum weighted edge cover, we develop three novel semi-streaming algorithms. Two of
these algorithms require a single pass through the input graph, require O(n log n) memory, and
provide a 2-approximation guarantee on the objective. We also leverage a relationship between
approximate maximum weighted matching and approximate minimum weighted edge cover to develop
a two-pass 3/2 + ε-approximate algorithm with the memory requirement of Paz and Schwartzman’s
semi-streaming matching algorithm. These streaming approaches are compared against the state-of-
the-art 3/2-approximate offline algorithm.
The semi-streaming matching and the novel edge cover algorithms proposed in this paper can
process graphs with several billions of edges in under 30 minutes using 6 GB of memory, which is
at least an order of magnitude improvement from the offline (non-streaming) algorithms. For the
largest graph, the best alternative offline parallel approximation algorithm (GPA+ROMA) could
not finish in three hours even while employing hundreds of processors and 1 TB of memory. We also
demonstrate an application of semi-streaming algorithm by computing a matching using linearly
bounded memory on intersection graphs derived from three machine learning datasets, while the
existing offline algorithms could not complete on one of these datasets since its memory requirement
exceeded 1TB."
citation: 'S. M. Ferdous, Alex Pothen, Mahantesh Halappanavar, &quot;Streaming Matching and Edge Cover in Practice.&quot; In the proceedings of SEA 2024, 2024.'
paperurl: "/files/pdf/papers/Ferdous et al_2024_Streaming  Matching and Covering in practice.pdf"
---
